[Music]
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is dr mark eatonson i'm a licensed
psychologist specializing in the
treatment of narcissism and related
disorders and i'm also author of the
book unmasking narcissism a guide to
understanding the narcissist in your
life
so a number of people have been asking
me to clarify the differences between
vulnerable narcissism and borderline
personality disorder or bpd
both can have similar presentations
and it can be difficult to discern the
correct diagnosis
so first let's clarify the term
borderline
at least in psychodynamic methodologies
borderline has two meanings and both are
relevant to today's episode
the first meaning refers to the severity
of disturbance in a person's personality
people with borderline level
personalities are considered to have
moderate to severe disturbances
now remember
we aren't necessarily talking about bpd
here
we're talking about a broad measure of
disturbance that can apply to multiple
personality styles
borderline level personalities rely on
psychological defenses that distort
reality
blur interpersonal boundaries and
disrupt the continuity of internal
experience
these defenses include things like
projection projective identification
denial acting out idealization and
devaluation and splitting individuals at
this level of disturbance also tend to
externalize their problems perceiving
them as coming from outside the self
they often feel like everything is
someone else's fault and they experience
themselves as essentially powerless over
their circumstances
and this feeling of powerlessness gets
channeled into rages or tantrums and
attempts to control the behavior of
other people
but they can also descend into spirals
of self-hatred and self-loathing that
can lead to self-injury and even suicide
now these sorts of issues can be found
in anyone with a borderline level
personality organization regardless of
their personality style
it's a bit confusing but just think of
borderline as referring to someone being
on the quote border between severe
personality disturbance and mild to
moderate personality disturbance
for someone to have a personality
disorder their disturbances must be at
or below
the borderline level of severity
so let's do a couple of examples to
illustrate
let's say that person one has a
narcissistic personality style but
they're functioning pretty well
they're flexible they have good insight
concerning themselves and other people
they have good distress tolerance and
they don't rely on reality distorting
defenses
we would say that that person is
functioning above the borderline level
and therefore that they don't have a
personality disorder
we'd say that they just have some
central insecurities about self-esteem
that are relatively well managed
now let's say that another person also
has a narcissistic personality style
but their issues are more severe
their perception of themself is
distorted their moods fluctuate between
extreme highs and lows and they're
hypersensitive to feeling ashamed blamed
or humiliated
and perhaps more importantly let's say
that they hold other people responsible
for those feelings
let's say that they also idealize and
devalue other people act impulsively and
fly into rages but then later act like
nothing happened
we would say that that person is
functioning at the borderline level and
therefore that they have npd or
narcissistic personality disorder
essentially they have the same
personality style the same central
issues and insecurities as the first
person but the disturbances are much
more severe
people functioning at the borderline
level often have numerous comorbidities
like depression anxiety and substance
use and if you think about it that makes
sense
someone who has an unstable identity and
unstable moods and who feels powerless
or out of control will likely develop
issues like depression and anxiety over
time and they're also more likely to
self-medicate with drugs and alcohol
okay so that was the first meaning of
borderline as a broad measure of
disturbance in the personality
now the second meaning refers
specifically to borderline personality
disorder or bpd
individuals with bpd
tend to experience others as either too
close or too distant
and they have trouble feeling
comfortable with any amount of intimacy
if someone's too close
then the person with bpd feels impinged
upon or even taken over and they tend to
react with severe anger designed to
re-establish a boundary
but if someone is too distant
then the person with bpd tends to feel
abandoned
and they may actually lash out at
themselves for not being good enough or
lovable
self-injury is common for individuals
with bpd
okay so we've discussed the term
borderline as a way of measuring the
severity of disturbance in a personality
and also as a discrete personality
disorder
so now let's talk about how npd and bpd
overlap
so for one they're both personality
disorders and that means that people
with either npd or bpd
are functioning at the borderline level
they both rely on similar ways of
defending themselves from unwanted
experience
they use projection projective
identification denial idealization and
devaluation and splitting
they both have problems with self-image
and confusions about the boundaries
between the self and others
they both want to feel loved and admired
and are also hypersensitive to feeling
rejected
and they also tend to externalize blame
for their problems
to act impulsively and to have low
thresholds for distress tolerance
the main difference is that in npd
there's typically a compensatory false
self
and that's a part of the personality
that's been split off
from deeply felt feelings of insecurity
and not being good enough
the false self strives for perfection
and narcissists seek constant infusions
of positive regard and admiration in
order to keep the false self in working
order
and in this way they're actually quite
dependent on other people for basic
self-esteem
and this dependency threatens the false
self which leads to further internal
compartmentalizations denial and
splitting now in vulnerable narcissistic
states
when the cracks in the false self begin
to show
the underlying issues in the personality
become more apparent
the self-image goes from defensive
superiority to instability and depletion
instead of self-assuredness there may be
extreme self-doubt instead of charm and
charisma social anxiety
the symptoms of vulnerable narcissism
look a lot like bpd but that's because
of the underlying borderline level
personality organization common to both
grandiose narcissism is simply a
defensive facade
and when the defense collapses the
deficits and dysfunction in the
personality become much more obvious
individuals with bpd have many of those
same deficits and dysfunctions they just
don't tend to have a defensive facade to
cover them up so i hope that clears up
some of the differences and similarities
between vulnerable npd and bpd
in many ways
they aren't really separate disorders
the structural problems in the
personality are very similar with each
and the main difference is how those
dysfunctions are expressed
and also the central preoccupations or
concerns that sort of define each
disorder
for npd the main concern is about
self-worth
while for bpd the main concern is about
managing closeness versus abandonment
now as always keep in mind that this is
just a general overview and to get an
accurate diagnosis you need to work with
a licensed mental health professional
if you do feel that these descriptions
fit your experience know that you're not
alone
both npd and bpd are treatable issues
and there's hope for healing
so please reach out with questions or
suggestions for future topics and until
next time
take good care
[Music]
you